We’ve now come
to the point where we can enjoy
the principal talk
of our Gilead graduation program.
It is entitled
“The Righteous One Will Get Up,”
and we have Brother Mark Sanderson
of the Governing Body to deliver that for us.
Well, for those of you who are graduating today,
this is indeed one
of the happiest days of your entire life.
And rightly so,
because today represents a wonderful milestone
after years of faithfully pursuing a spiritual career.
But I have to be realistic.
I hate to be a downer at this moment,
but realistically,
we have to say that not every day
of your life ahead
is going to be as happy as this one.
Now, why do we say that?
Well, of course,
we know that Satan rules this world.
And living in these last days
that we live in brings us anxiety,
sometimes even fear.
Life is full of what-ifs.
In fact, those two words “what if”
can send us down all kinds of roads
that can be quite terrifying.
For you who are graduating today,
maybe it’s something like:
‘What if I can’t learn the new language?
‘Or what if I can’t adapt to a new culture?
‘Or what if I get home and the brothers
have a new assignment
for me that I’m not expecting?’
Well, that’s for you.
But for all of us who are here in this audience
and perhaps even for our larger audience
via JW Broadcasting®,
maybe it’s questions like:
‘What if I face persecution,
‘even violent persecution?
‘What if there’s a natural disaster?
‘What if I become seriously ill?
What if I lose a loved one in death?’
Well, those questions can seem hypothetical,
but many of our brothers
and sisters around the world
are facing those situations right now.
For them, it’s not a matter of what if;
it’s what is.
Well, now, brothers, while it is absolutely certain
that we are going to experience calamities
because we live in the last days
where we expect “critical times hard to deal with,”
there is something that is equally certain
—that is no “what if.”
It’s a fundamental principle that applies
to every single righteous
and faithful servant of Jehovah.
And that principle can fill us
with confidence and courage.
Now, what is this principle?
Well, open your Bibles;
let’s look at Proverbs chapter 24.
And as you’re turning your Bibles there,
I’ll just remind you that in the Proverbs,
many of these proverbial thoughts
actually are made up of two verses,
and so this one begins in verse 15.
It actually begins with a warning,
and this is what it says:
“Do not wickedly lie in ambush
“near the home of the righteous one;
do not destroy his place of rest.”
Now, why?
Why is it that you
should not attack the righteous one?
Well, now, notice the reason,
and here’s this fundamental truth:
“For the righteous one may fall seven times,
“and he will get up again,
but the wicked
will be made to stumble by calamity.”
Well, now, let’s take this verse apart.
What is it really trying to tell us?
For example, what does it mean to fall?
The March 15, 2013, Watchtower,
commenting on Proverbs 24:16,
defined fall as “an adversity or a setback.”
One reference work says:
“‘Falls’ is the word that can simply mean
“‘falls over or falls down.’
“But it also has a figurative meaning
of [now notice this]
‘experiences disaster or ruin.’”
And that is the sense here.
Well, what does it mean, then, to get up?
That same reference work goes on to say:
“Likewise, ‘rises again’
“can simply mean ‘gets up after falling down.’
“But here, it has the figurative sense
“of ‘overcomes adversity
or becomes prosperous again.’”
Well, now, why seven times?
The same reference work says:
“Most translations render ‘seven times’ literally,
“but the figure seven
“probably has
its Hebrew symbolic meaning in this context,
“namely, ‘completeness.’
“For that reason, some translations read:
“‘Even if a righteous person
falls down many times,
he will always get up.’”
The Contemporary English Version says:
“Even if good people fall seven times,
they will get back up.
But when trouble strikes the wicked,
that’s the end of them.”
So, what is Proverbs 24:15, 16 trying to tell us?
Well, basically,
that when a wicked person experiences calamity,
he’s conquered; he will not get up.
But that is not the case for a righteous one.
A righteous person will get up;
he will not give up.
He will overcome calamity,
and he will become prosperous again.
In fact, verse 15, in effect, says:
‘Don’t even try to set a trap for the righteous one
‘because no matter how hard
you knock him down,
he’s going to get up again.’
Now, why?
Why is it that the righteous one gets up?
Is it because he’s just so strong
and he’s just so personally resilient?
No.
I want you to look at the cross reference
for Proverbs 24:16.
Do you see the scripture?
It’s Psalm 34:19.
Now, here the psalmist David
expresses a similar thought
to what we just read here in Proverbs,
but he adds an important detail.
That verse says:
“Many are the hardships
“[or if you look at the footnote, “calamities”]
“of the righteous one,
but Jehovah rescues him from them all.”
So Jehovah helps the righteous one to get up.
In fact, if we go back
to that March 15, 2013, Watchtower,
where it commented on Proverbs 24:16, it said:
“Jehovah will not allow those trusting in him
“to stumble or to experience a fall
“—[that is] an adversity
or a setback in their worship—
from which they cannot recover.”
Well, now, brothers, what does that mean?
Does it mean that somehow Jehovah
is going to intervene miraculously
every time one of his servants
experiences calamity?
No.
But Jehovah has taught his righteous ones
what they need to do in times of calamity.
They know that they
must ‘keep on seeking first God’s Kingdom
and God’s righteousness,’
as Matthew 6:33 says.
And so, what does the righteous one
do when calamity comes?
You see, it doesn’t stop
the righteous one from praying;
it doesn’t stop him from attending meetings
or talking to others about his faith.
No, he keeps on doing what pleases Jehovah,
even in the face of calamity.
And doing what is right
is what helps him to recover
from whatever calamity may come upon him.
Now, the apostle Paul
is a wonderful example of the truth of this principle.
Let’s look in 2 Corinthians chapter 11,
and let’s just remind ourselves
of some of the calamities
that came upon the apostle Paul.
Second Corinthians chapter 11
—let’s begin reading in verse 23.
Paul says:
“Are they ministers of Christ?
“I reply like a madman,
I am more outstandingly one:
“I have done more work,
been imprisoned more often,
“suffered countless beatings,
and experienced many near-deaths.
“Five times I received
40 strokes less one from the Jews,
“three times I was beaten with rods,
“once I was stoned,
“three times I experienced shipwreck,
“a night and a day
I have spent in the open sea;
“in journeys often,
in dangers from rivers,
“in dangers from robbers,
in dangers from my own people,
“in dangers from the nations,
in dangers in the city,
“in dangers in the wilderness,
in dangers at sea,
“in dangers among false brothers,
“in labor and toil,
in sleepless nights often,
“in hunger and thirst,
frequently without food,
in cold and lacking clothing.”
Well, now, brothers, honestly,
many people would’ve been conquered
by just one of those things, isn’t it true?
But Paul kept getting up;
he kept getting up and going on.
And what was his conclusion?
Well, just read it in 2 Corinthians chapter 4,
and look here at verse 8.
Paul says:
“We are hard-pressed in every way,
“but not cramped beyond movement;
“we are perplexed,
but not absolutely with no way out;
we are persecuted but not abandoned.”
And now notice this one:
“We are knocked down, but not destroyed.
“Always we endure in our body
“the death-dealing treatment that Jesus suffered,
“that the life of Jesus may also be made manifest
in our body.”
Did you see that?
“Knocked down [knocked down],
but not destroyed.”
Righteous Paul was not destroyed
by the adverse experiences that came to him.
He didn’t allow calamity to stop him
from giving that next witness,
from offering that next prayer to Jehovah,
from taking advantage of the next opportunity
to meet with his brothers.
You see, that’s what a righteous person does.
He keeps on seeking Jehovah
and seeking to please him.
And because Paul did that,
he was always able to get up
with the help of Jehovah.
But now, brothers, that’s true for Paul,
but it’s also true for every one
of God’s faithful and righteous servants
all around this earth.
I’d like to introduce to you
three different faithful servants of Jehovah
who have also experienced the truth
of Proverbs 24:16.
This is Brother Michael Legaspi
from the Philippines.
When Typhoon Haiyan struck in 2013,
Michael went with his wife and his young son
to the Kingdom Hall
in Tacloban City to seek shelter.
There had been many typhoons before.
This was not an unusual event in the Philippines,
but this time, there was something different.
This was the first time in recent memory
that there was a storm surge
—a wall of water 15 feet high,
or four and a half meters high,
that struck the Kingdom Hall.
The walls and the roof collapsed.
Michael worked very, very hard
to try to rescue his wife
and the other brothers and sisters
who were trapped under the debris.
But sadly, his wife had already perished.
Then, in the water by this time,
he heard his son cry out to him:
“Papa! Papa!”
He reached out,
and he grabbed him in the water.
But because of his exhaustion
from already helping the brothers to escape
from under the debris
and because of the cold temperature of the water,
he became unconscious.
And when he woke up, his son was gone;
he too had perished in this storm.
Well, at first,
Michael was inconsolable.
He blamed himself.
He felt that there was something more
that he could have done to save them.
But the elders shepherded him.
They helped him to see
that there was nothing that he could have done.
The storm was beyond the power of any man.
But even in those difficult times,
Michael continued with his spiritual program.
He continued to serve as an elder
and as a regular pioneer.
The brothers encouraged him,
“Why don’t you begin to volunteer
at the disaster relief center?”
The whole area was completely devastated;
all the homes had been destroyed.
Michael got busy
and worked to help rebuild
the homes of the local brothers.
And when that work was finished,
he enrolled as a construction volunteer,
working with a group of brothers
building Kingdom Halls within the region.
And then when that work was complete,
he volunteered to help a congregation
that was quite a distance away.
It required him to travel one and a half hours
each way by motorcycle.
But he was willing to do it
because the congregation
needed the help of an elder.
Well, now, here is Michael today
—busy and active in Jehovah’s service.
Just like all righteous ones,
Michael kept doing Jehovah’s will
despite the terrible calamity that he experienced.
Now, what do you think, brothers?
Do you think Michael got up?
This is Teymur Akhmedov
who lives in Kazakhstan.
In 2017, Teymur was arrested
on a false charge of inciting religious hatred.
After being in pretrial detention for three months,
Teymur was sentenced to a five-year prison term.
Before his arrest,
Teymur was being treated for cancer.
When he was arrested, his treatment stopped,
and the disease began to progress.
Now, you talk about calamity.
Not only was he in prison because of his faith
but he also had to deal
with life-threatening cancer at the same time.
After being held for 13 months,
Teymur was finally allowed to go
to another city for medical care.
Now, here you see Teymur
after surgery in his hospital bed,
but you notice he’s chained,
both at the arm and at the leg.
After the courts had rejected
multiple appeals to have Teymur released,
it appeared that it was impossible.
All options had been exhausted.
Yet Teymur was told at this point,
“You can be released
if you’re willing to sign a confession.”
The authorities told him to write out
that he had made a mistake
in speaking to other people about his beliefs
and that he was now sorry for his actions.
Teymur absolutely refused.
He told the authorities
that he would rather sit in prison
with a clear conscience
than be released with a guilty one.
Well, by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness,
after fourteen and a half months in prison,
the president of Kazakhstan gave Teymur
a full pardon without any admission of guilt,
and he was released.
Here you see Teymur
in a recent photo taken with his dear wife.
What was it that helped Teymur to get up
despite imprisonment
and dealing with a life-threatening illness?
This is what he said:
“We each have a choice
“—whether to stand by God’s principles
or to ignore them.
“If we stand by God’s principles,
then we can get through any test successfully.”
Teymur overcame the adversity,
would you agree?
He truly got up.
This is Sister Laura French.
She began Bethel service
on May 1, 1926.
She was part of this small Bethel family
in Canada,
made up of less than 20 persons.
About 1936,
it became apparent
that the branch servant in Canada
was an apostate.
In time, the matter was investigated.
And although Sister French
was not involved with the apostasy,
she had been a roommate with one of the sisters
who was working closely with the branch servant.
Thus, she was wrongly viewed
as one of his supporters.
And so on May 1, 1936,
she was among a group of seven Bethelites
who were dismissed from Bethel,
along with the branch servant.
What did Sister French do?
She never complained.
She did not say that it was unfair, or unjust,
although she said that initially she was hurt.
She decided that the best remedy
would be to go on serving Jehovah.
She said,
“After leaving Bethel,
“I had four marvelous years
in the pioneer service.”
The first two years,
she and another sister lived in a tent
while preaching in a large area
where there were no congregations
of Jehovah’s people.
Later, she and her pioneer partner
worked from a house car.
These faithful sisters
truly worked hard for Jehovah.
Well, in 1940, Sister French came to Toronto
for a short vacation
when suddenly the ban
on Jehovah’s Witnesses struck.
To her surprise and delight,
she was invited to come and work
at the underground branch office.
And with the approval of Brother Rutherford,
Sister French returned to Bethel service
in 1940
and continued to serve there
until she finished her earthly course
on December 23, 1990.
At the end of her earthly life,
she said she was so happy
that she had decided to go pioneering
when she was dismissed from Bethel.
Of that group who were dismissed,
she was the only one
who continued to serve Jehovah faithfully.
Sister French kept doing the right thing,
even when she was misjudged by others.
She overcame an unjust situation;
she overcame that adversity; she truly got up.
Do you agree?
Well, brothers, what have we learned
from considering this principle
at Proverbs 24:16?
When calamity strikes,
you truly may feel knocked down.
You may not know the details
of exactly how everything is going to work out,
but you will always know what to do next.
You will know how to pray;
you’ll know to go to that next meeting;
you’ll know to go out in the ministry;
you’ll know to always make decisions
that will please Jehovah.
And as you do so,
Jehovah will show you the way to move on
and to get up
from any calamity that you might face.
That was true of the apostle Paul.
That was true of Michael Legaspi.
It was true of Teymur Akhmedov.
It was true of Laura French.
And it will be true for all of you.
Remember this:
When calamity knocks you down,
seek Jehovah, and you’ll rebound.
What does the principle say?
‘For though the righteous one
‘may fall seven times,
he will get up again.’
And with that confidence in your hearts,
may you go to your assignments
with all of our love
and with the rich blessing
of our marvelous and amazing God, Jehovah.
Well, that brings us now
to the point in our program
for the presentation of the diplomas,
and I will be assisted in this
by our dear Brother Kenneth Flodin.
The first couple is Brother and Sister Aggarwal.
They’ll be returning to India.
And we have Brother Batsaikhan,
who will go back to Mongolia.
Brother and Sister Chiposa will return to Zambia.
Brother and Sister Cicio
are going back to Romania.
Brother and Sister Dhillon are returning to India.
And now we have
Brother and Sister Drabysheuski,
who are going back to Finland.
Brother and Sister Dredge
will be returning to Thailand.
And this is Brother and Sister Habiyaremye.
They’re going back to Rwanda.
Brother Horváth is going back to Hungary.
And Brother Jerczyński is going to Poland.
And this is Brother and Sister LaFrancois,
and they will now be serving in Korea.
Brother and Sister Locquiao
are going to the Philippines.
Brother and Sister Ludlow
are going to be returning to Myanmar.
And Brother and Sister Mkulichi
will be returning to Malawi.
And Brother and Sister Morgan
will now be serving in Kenya.
And we have Sister Palma.
She’ll be returning to the Philippines.
Brother and Sister Perron
will now be serving in Senegal.
Brother and Sister Purnomo
will be going to India—no, Indonesia.
I was influenced by the video.
And Brother and Sister Sandoval
will now be going to Spain.
Brother Sasaki
will be returning to Japan.
And Brother and Sister Sendall
will be going back to Trinidad and Tobago.
Brother and Sister Sivakumaran
will be returning to Sri Lanka.
And now we have Brother and Sister Wilson,
and they’re going to be assigned
to Congo (Kinshasa).
Brother and Sister Woosley
—they’ll now be assigned to Asia.
And now we have our final couple
—Brother and Sister Zenonos.
They’ll be going to Greece.
We want to thank Brother Flodin
for caring for all those names for me.
It’s such a big help.
Well, now it’s a pleasure to present to you
the graduates of the 146th class of Gilead.
And the class has a letter that will now be read,
and Brother Philip Morgan will do that for us.
“To the Governing Body
and the United States Bethel family.
“Over the course of the past five months,
“more than ever before,
“we have been tuned to the evidence
of Jehovah’s powerful holy spirit
“all around us.
“From the day we entered the main lobby
here at the Watchtower Educational Center,
“the fruitage of that spirit enveloped us
“with love and kindness
“through the hospitality
of the United States Bethel family.
“Without your daily help and encouragement,
“we would not have been able to give
such concentrated focus to our studies.
“We thank you all from the bottom of our hearts!
“We also have sensed how our instructors
“have striven to allow
the holy spirit to shape and mold them,
“even as they shared the benefits
of their own deep study of God’s Word
“and experience with us
each day in the classroom.
“Just like those Jehovah
used to train others in the past,
“they imparted to us
not only the finer points of the truth
“but ‘[their] very souls.’
“They ‘became . . . beloved to us,’
even as we know we are to them.
“Perhaps most touching
has been the personal attention
“shown to us
by you dear brothers of the Governing Body.
“The evidence of Jehovah’s spirit
working through you
“is something we will cherish
for the rest of our lives.
“We realize how much concern
you carry with you
“for the entire association
of our brothers worldwide,
“as well as for the many sheeplike ones
“yet to be reached with the Kingdom good news.
“We especially appreciated the fact
“that you each took time to spend with our class
“and spoke to us
as a father to children to reassure us,
“to protect us with reminders,
“and to build confidence
that Jehovah will be with us in the days ahead.
“And you sent many of your helpers
to do just the same,
“which we deeply appreciated.
“The apostle Paul
reminded his anointed brothers
“that ‘where the spirit of Jehovah is,
there is freedom.’
“Now more than ever,
we see evidence of how true that is.
“By means of his faithful slave,
the Gilead arrangement,
“and this beautiful Bethel family,
“Jehovah has used his spirit
“to free us from any inhibitions,
“fears, or hesitations.
“We feel more prepared
to accomplish whatever work he assigns
“by relying
on that most powerful force in the universe
“—God’s holy spirit.
“Along with the rest of God’s family of servants,
“heavenly and earthly,
“we are ready to follow the leading of that spirit
“wherever it will send us in the days ahead!
“With heartfelt love,
“we are your brothers and sisters
of the 146th class of Gilead.”
Graduates
—that has a nice sound to it, doesn’t it?
It came quickly.
Well, I’ve been asked to give
a few comments here at the end
and to include this point,
so I’ll begin with it:
Back in 2011,
the Governing Body adjusted
the objective of Gilead training
in order to help further strengthen and stabilize
the field and branch organization.
And as a result,
we have seen
Jehovah’s rich blessing on this adjustment
as it relates
to branch and country committees worldwide.
Since the time
of the graduation of the 132nd class,
182 graduates
have been appointed to a committee,
either during or sometime
after their training at Gilead.
That’s a wonderful fact, isn’t it?
And it’s something
that is really proving to be a blessing
to the worldwide field
and to our dear brotherhood and, above all,
in upholding and honoring Jehovah’s name.
So this is a marvelous arrangement.
Now with this in mind,
just for a couple of minutes,
I want to give
concluding comments on this topic:
“Maintain Your ‘Shield of Faith.’”
You see, when you
are settled into your assignments
—perhaps with new responsibilities—
remember to remain watchful
so that you stay focused
on what is most important,
namely, the doing of Jehovah’s will.
The danger can come
when we feel that we’ve achieved most
or even all of our spiritual goals.
If we allow that to happen,
our interests could turn to other things.
For example, if we lose sight of the point
and the purpose
behind what it means to follow Jesus,
we could start to center our thoughts
on other goals (it could happen),
perhaps even material things.
But don’t let this happen to you.
Keep your shield of faith strong.
In Bible times,
soldiers repaired and secured
their shields between battles.
They treasured
those protective pieces of armor.
Because their shields
were often covered with leather,
the soldiers would rub oil
on to the shield to help preserve it
and to keep the metal parts free from rust.
If a soldier found damage or weakness,
what did he do?
He immediately made
the needed repairs to his shield.
In this way,
he was always ready for the next battle.
We need to keep this up in a spiritual way.
Over time, a brother or sister
might lay down his or her shield of faith
and go after things that have no lasting value.
The Devil wants nothing more
than for us to neglect our faith
and open up our heart to his attacks.
And for this reason,
Paul, the apostle Paul,
was inspired to say
that those who go
after material riches, for instance,
would cultivate
“many senseless and harmful desires.”
He added:
“Flee from these things.”
You see, ultimately,
we are each responsible for how large
and how strong our shield of faith proves to be.
Now, we show that we are strengthening
our faith in Jehovah and his Son
when we take time
to continue caring for our spiritual needs.
So don’t take liberties with your spiritual routine
just because you’ve graduated
from this wonderful school.
Don’t become self-satisfied
because of resting
on a privilege you may come to enjoy.
That’s not the point of it, is it?
Keep growing as a spiritual person
by giving attention to your faith day by day.
Oil and preserve your shield
by regularly attending Christian meetings
and speaking about Jehovah’s name
and his Kingdom to others.
Also, maintain strong faith
by reading God’s Word every day
—as you’ve been encouraged to
and have been doing—
and applying its counsel in all that you do.
Imitate the Christ every step of the way.
In this way, you’ll be like
the victorious soldier who worked hard
to care for his shield
and other valuable pieces of armor.
Hold your shield firmly in front of you.
Use it to protect your figurative heart
and to defend Jehovah’s pure worship.
Keep it well maintained,
and you will always be ready
to “fight the fine fight of the faith.”
Jehovah and his Son will bless you for it.